# Unit 1: Introduction to Cloud Computing [6 LH]

## 1.1 Overview of Cloud Computing

1. **Impact of Cloud Computing on IT**: Over the past decade, cloud
computing has significantly affected almost every aspect of IT.
This includes various departments within organizations such as
sales, marketing, finance, and support.

2. **Redesigning Programs**: Organizations are reevaluating and
redesigning their programs to leverage the benefits of cloud 
computing. These benefits include rapid accessibility, no need for 
software downloads, and a pay-as-you-go cost model.

3. **Transformation of Application Development**: According to 
Gartner, cloud computing is changing how applications are developed,
 tested, and deployed. This shift is leading to changes in the 
 priorities of application development, where factors like cost, 
 agility, adaptability, and speed are crucial.

4. **Cloud Computing Basics**: Cloud computing involves accessing 
computer resources, including storage and computational power, via 
the Internet. Users don't need to manage the underlying hardware 
and software, as everything is provided as a service by cloud 
providers.

5. **Public vs. Private Clouds**: Clouds can be categorized as 
private (for a single organization), public (serving multiple 
organizations), or hybrid (a combination of both). Amazon Web 
Services (AWS) is cited as the largest public cloud provider.

6. **Cloud Services**: In cloud computing, various computer 
services are delivered remotely over the Internet. Clients 
typically pay providers a monthly or annual fee for accessing 
services like Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service 
(PaaS), and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS).

7. **Cost Reduction and Leveling the Playing Field**: Cloud 
computing eliminates the need for large capital investments in IT 
infrastructure and software. This accessibility to IT resources 
on-demand levels the playing field for small and medium-sized 
businesses, allowing them to compete globally without significant 
upfront costs.

8. **Data Centers and Cloud Providers**: Cloud computing is powered 
by data centers, large facilities filled with servers. These data 
centers are responsible for hosting applications, services, and 
virtual machines that clients access remotely.

9. **Data Distribution via the Cloud**: Data is stored remotely and
accessed through web-based connections, making it accessible to 
anyone with an Internet connection. Cloud services offer cost 
advantages over purchasing and maintaining expensive computing 
hardware.

10. **Pay-Per-Use Model**: Cloud services are typically billed on a 
pay-per-use basis, allowing businesses to pay only for the 
resources they consume. This flexibility enables scalability, as 
businesses can easily adjust resource allocation based on their 
needs.

11. **Key Cloud Computing Principles**: Cloud services should offer 
availability, control, scalability, automation, and reliability. 
Users should have the ability to manage resources, scale up or down 
as needed, and rely on the cloud provider for service uptime.

12. **Utility-Based Subscription**: Cloud services are often 
compared to utility bills, where customers pay for the services 
they use. This subscription-based model offers cost predictability 
and flexibility.

## 1.2 Evolution of Cloud Computing

**The Early 1960s**

The computer scientist John McCarthy, come up with the concept of 
timesharing and enabling the organization to simultaneously use an 
expensive mainframe. This computing is described as a significant 
contribution to the development of the Internet, and a pioneer of 
Cloud computing.

**1969**

The idea of an "Intergalactic Computer Network" or "Galactic 
Network" (a computer networking co similar to today's Internet) was 
introduced by JCR. Licklider, who was responsible for enabling the 
development of ARPANET (Advanced Research Projects Agency Network). 
His vision was for every on the globe to be interconnected and 
being able to access programs and data at any site, from anywhere.

**1970**

Using virtualization software like VMware; it became possible to 
run more than one Operating System simultaneously in an isolated 
environment. It was possible to run a completely different Computer 
(machine) inside a different Operating System.

**1997**

The first known definition of the term "Cloud Computing" seems to 
be by Prof. Ramnath Chellappen Dallas in 1997-A computing paradigm 
where the boundaries of computing will be determined economic 
rationale rather than technical limits alone."

**1999**

The arrival of Salesforce.com in 1999 pioneered the concept of 
delivering enterprise applications via a simple website. The 
services firm covered the way for both specialist and mainstream 
software firms to deliver applications over the Internet Salesforce 
started to offer users the ability to run applications over the 
internet, marking the beginning of Software as a Service.

**2002**

Amazon introduced its web-based retail services. The Cloud 
Computing Infrastructure Model gave them the flexibility to use 
their computer's capacity much more efficiently.

**2003**

The first public release of Xen, which creates a Virtual Machine 
Monitor (VMM) also known as 1 hypervisor, a software system that 
allows the execution of multiple virtual guest operating systems 
simultaneously on a single machine.

**2006**

Amazon launched Amazon Web Services, which offers online services 
to other websites, or clients. One of Amazon Web Services' sites, 
called Amazon Mechanical Turk, provides a variety of Cloud-based 
services including storage, computation, and "human intelligence." 
Amazon expanded its cloud services. First was its Elastic Compute 
Cloud (EC2), which allowed people to access computers and run their 
applications on them, all on the cloud. Then they brought out the 
Simple Storage Service (S3). This introduced the pay-as-you-go 
model to both users and the industry as a whole, and it has become 
standard practice now.

Google launched the Google Docs services. Google Docs was 
originally based on two separate products, Google Spreadsheets, and 
Writely. Google purchased Writely, which offers renters the ability 
to save documents, edit documents, and transfer them into blogging 
systems which documents are compatible with Microsoft Word. Google 
Spreadsheets, which was acquired from 2Web Technologies, in 2005 is 
an Internet based program allowing users to develop, update, and 
edit spreadsheets, and to share the data online.

**2007**

IBM, Google, and several universities joined forces to develop a 
server farm for research projects needing both fast processors and 
huge data sets. The University of Washington was the first to sign 
up and use resources provided by IBM and Google. Carnegie Mellon 
University, MIT, Stanford University, the University of Maryland, 
and the University of California at Berkeley, quickly followed 
suit. The universities immediately realized computer experiments 
can be done faster and for less money if IBM and Google were 
supporting their research. Since much of the research was focused 
on problems IBM and Google had interests in, they also benefited 
from the arrangement. 

Netflix launched its video streaming service, using the Cloud, and 
provided support for the practice of "binge-watching."

**2008**

Google announced a preview release of App Engine, a developer tool 
that allowed users to run their web applications on Google 
infrastructure.

Microsoft announced the Windows Azure Platform.

Eucalyptus offered the first AWS API compatible platform, which was 
used for distributing private Clouds. In the same year. NASA's 
OpenNebula provided the first open-source software for deploying 
Private and Hybrid Clouds, Many of its most innovative features 
focused on the needs of major businesses.

**2010**

Cloud Storage launched. Google App Engine for Business announced, 
offering added management and support features tailored 
specifically for the enterprise, BigQuery and Prediction API 
announced in limited preview. 

Windows Azure Platform commercially available. Rackspace Hosting 
and NASA jointly launched an open-source cloud-software initiative 
called OpenStack.

**2011**

Google App Engine officially leaves preview and becomes a "fully 
supported Google product". IBM introduced the IBM SmartCloud 
framework, in support of Smarter Planet. Then, Apple launched 
iCloud, which focuses on storing more personal information such as 
photos, music, videos, etc. Microsoft began advertising the Cloud 
on television, making the general public aware of its ability to 
store photos or video with easy access.

**2012**

Google Compute Engine was released as an addition to the Google 
Cloud Platform. The offering stands as the laaS component of the 
platform enabling users to launch virtual machines on-demand, which 
can be launched from the standard images or custom images created 
by users. Oracle introduced the Oracle Cloud, offering the three 
basics for business, laaS (Infrastructure-as-a-Service), PaaS 
(Platform-as-a-Service), and SAAS (Software-as-a-Service).

**2013**

Google Cloud Storage begins automatically encrypting each Storage 
object's data and metadata under the 128-bit Advanced Encryption 
Standard (AES-128). PHP support for Google App Engine goes into 
preview, making PHP on App Engine available for everyone.

IBM acquires SoftLayer, which marks IBM's entry into cloud 
computing.

**2014**

Google Cloud SQL graduates to General Availability (GA), supporting 
automatic encryption, 99.95% uptime SLA, and support for databases 
up to 500GB. Google acquired Firebase and Stackdriver making them a 
part of GCP.

Windows Azure was renamed, Microsoft Azure. IBM introduced Bluemix, 
a Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS).

**2015**

Financial Conduct Authority FCA declares cloud technologies as 
"acceptable" for use by financial services firms.

Microsoft Azure Cloud Switch was introduced as a cross-platform 
Linux distribution. Currently known SONIC.

Google Cloud DNS goes into GA along with the expansion of load 
balancing solutions to 12 additional points of presence. The Beta 
version of Bigtable is launched.

**2016**

Salesforce.com, a cloud computing company that makes money 
primarily through its customer relationship management product 
suite, selects Amazon Web Services as its preferred public cloud 
infrastructure provider. However, Salesforce.com does not plan to 
move entirely to Amazon but rather uses Amazon only to meet 
infrastructure expansion needs in new geographical areas and for 
specific use cases.

IBM rolled the SoftLayer brand under its Bluemix brand of PaaS 
offerings.

**2017**

AWS launches 13 instances, a new generation of instances with large 
SSDs intended to be used for high throughput datastores. The 
instances are more than 50% cheaper than the corresponding previous 
generation 12 instances and have larger memory. 

MIT math professor Andrew V. Sutherland breaks the record for the 
largest ever Google Compute Engine cluster with 220,000 cores on Preemptible Virtual Machines.

IBM unified its entire cloud portfolio as IBM Cloud Google, IBM, 
and Lyft announced the Alpha release of Istio: a new open-source 
project that provides a uniform way to help connect, secure, manage 
and monitor microservices.

**2018**

Amazon acquired the aws.com domain from Earth Networks, formerly 
known as Automated Weather Source.

According to Deloitte, spending on IT-as-a-Service for data 
centers, software and services reached $5478 by the end of 2018. As 
per the salesforce study, cloud computing spending is growing at 4.
5x the rate of IT spending since 2009 and is expected to grow at 
better than 6x the rate of IT spending through 2020.

**2019**

Amazon announced AWS Outposts, which is a fully managed service 
that extends AWS infrastructure, AWS services, APIs, and tools to 
virtually any customer datacenter, co-location space, or 
on-premises facility for a truly consistent hybrid experience.

**2020**

Microsoft said that there was a 775% increase in Microsoft Teams 
usage in Italy due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The company estimates 
there are now 44 million daily active users of Teams worldwide.

## 1.3 Characteristics of Cloud Computing

**1. On-demand self-service**: This characteristic means that users 
can access and utilize cloud services without requiring human 
intervention or interaction with the service provider. Users can 
request and manage resources independently, such as email, 
applications, networks, or servers, without needing to go through a 
formal IT department. The cloud infrastructure automatically 
processes the user's requests.

**2. Broad network access**: Cloud services are designed to be 
accessible over the Internet, and they can be accessed using 
standard mechanisms. This accessibility ensures that a wide range 
of client devices, including mobile phones and laptops, can connect 
to and use cloud services.

**3. Resource pooling**: In cloud computing, physical and virtual 
resources are pooled together to serve multiple clients. Resources 
like storage, processing power, memory, and network bandwidth are 
dynamically allocated and reassigned based on the specific needs of 
clients. Importantly, clients may have limited awareness of the 
exact physical location of these resources but may have some 
control over their location at a higher level of abstraction, such 
as by specifying a country, state, or datacenter.

**4. Rapid elasticity**: Cloud computing platforms offer the 
ability to rapidly and elastically provision resources as needed. 
This means that resources can be scaled up or down to match demand 
automatically or with minimal manual intervention. To users, the 
cloud often appears to provide unlimited resources that can be 
allocated in any quantity and at any time.

**5. Measured service**: Cloud systems implement metering 
capabilities that monitor and control resource usage. This metering 
is applied at an appropriate level of abstraction for the specific 
service, such as storage, processing, or bandwidth. By measuring 
resource usage, cloud providers can transparently report and 
optimize the consumption of resources for both the provider and the 
consumer of the service. This measured service approach enhances 
transparency and cost control.

## 1.4 Types of Cloud and its Cloud Services

**Types of Cloud**

1. **Public Cloud:**

   - **Definition:** A public cloud is a cloud environment hosted 
   and managed by an external cloud service provider, and it is 
   accessible to multiple organizations on a pay-per-use basis over 
   the internet.

   - **Pros:**
     - Easy scalability.
     - No geographical restrictions.
     - Cost-effective.
     - Highly reliable.
     - Easy to manage.

   - **Cons:**
     - Not considered the safest option for sensitive data.

2. **Private Cloud:**

   - **Definition:** A private cloud is an infrastructure 
   controlled by a single organization, providing a controlled 
   environment with centralized access to IT resources. It can be 
   hosted externally or on-site.

   - **Pros:**
     - Improved security.
     - Greater control.
     - Customizable.

   - **Cons:**
     - Harder to access data from remote locations.
     - Requires IT expertise.

3. **Hybrid Cloud:**

   - **Definition:** A hybrid cloud combines elements of both 
   public and private clouds to create a more flexible and 
   customized IT solution. It allows organizations to leverage the 
   benefits of both deployment models.

   - **Pros:**
     - Highly flexible and scalable.
     - Cost-effective.
     - Enhanced security.

   - **Cons:**
     - Potential network communication conflicts between the 
     private and public clouds.

4. **Community Cloud:**

   - **Definition:** A community cloud is a collaborative, 
   multi-tenant platform shared by multiple organizations, often 
   from the same industry or field, with similar concerns about 
   security, compliance, and performance.

   - **Pros:**
     - Scalability.
     - Compliance with industry regulations.
     - Highly flexible.

   - **Cons:**
     - Shared storage and bandwidth.
     - Data security concerns due to shared space.

**Cloud Services:**

Cloud computing service models are categorized into three primary 
categories:

1. **Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS):**

   - **Definition:** IaaS provides the foundational infrastructure 
   of virtual servers, networks, operating systems, and storage 
   devices. It eliminates the need for on-premises hardware and 
   offers flexibility, stability, and scalability.

   - **Use Cases:** Suitable for organizations seeking a 
   cost-effective IT solution without the need for on-site 
   hardware. Can be public, private, or hybrid.

2. **Platform as a Service (PaaS):**

   - **Definition:** PaaS offers a platform and software foundation 
   provided by cloud providers, allowing organizations to design 
   and run their applications. It is highly scalable and suitable 
   for scenarios with multiple developers.

   - **Use Cases:** Ideal for creating web apps, corporate 
   scenarios with multiple developers, and cases where existing 
   data sources need to be integrated.

3. **Software as a Service (SaaS):**

   - **Definition:** SaaS involves the delivery of software via the 
   internet to multiple organizations through subscription or 
   pay-per-use models. It eliminates the need for organizations to 
   manage the software themselves.

   - **Use Cases:** Useful for software that requires frequent 
   online or mobile access, such as CRM systems and mobile sales 
   management software.

## 1.5 Benefits and Challenges of Cloud Computing

## 1.6 Applications Cloud Computing

## 1.7 Cloud Storage

## 1.8 Cloud Services Requirements,

## 1.9 Cloud and Dynamic Infrastructure

## 1.10 Cloud Adoption